13 Minutes
==========

In this post I want to talk about improvisation. In the musical world, improvisation is an essential component of performance in many styles of music. Perhaps most notably in Jazz and Blues. In software engineering, it's harder to see where improvisation fits.

I think it would be very difficult to find a Jazz musician who would say you can have Jazz without improvisation, but I don't think would be very difficult to find an engineer who would say you can't have a system without improvisation. In fact, it may be more likely to find an engineer who would say that there's no place for improvisation in a software system at all.

I disagree.

I got to thinking about all of this while listening to the BBC World Service's [13 Minutes to the Moon, Season 2](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p083wp70). It tells the Apollo 13 story through interviews with the people who worked the mission. When we get to the part of the story where the engineers have to come up with a solution to fix a quickly exipiring oxygen supply, the documentary's writer and narrator tells us,

> "NASA would have to indulge in a rare feat of pure improvisation. NASA had learned to be wary of creativity and inventiveness in the heat of the moment - knowing that plans hatched in the heat of battle often harboured hidden flaws."

Now, the stakes are so high in the case of Apollo 13 that I think we can agree that making a mistake is not ok. And we can likely agree that a "guess" has a higher probability of becoming a mistake than a developed and rehearsed solution. But here we get to a crucial misreading of improvisation: improvisation is not guessing.

When Jazz guitarists are [comping](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comping), we're not _guessing_ what chords to play or even what [voicing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voicing_(music)) to use. We're using chords that we _already know will work_. That doesn't mean we've played them in exactly this way before, or that we're not improvising. In fact, how we use them _in this moment_ is unique and may never be repeated. We know they'll work because we know the rules and their limits. We hear what the drums and piano are doing; we hear where the soloist is taking us and we jam with that in the moment. Said differently, we understand the complex system we're operating on so well that we can integrate our knowledge and skills over a given set of constraints in real time.

That's exactly what the NASA engineers did. And it's what my team did during our last outage - though the stakes were much lower and the system much less complex, obviously :)

Would it be fair to say that the moves we deploy to resolve an outage are often decribed as "hacks"? I think it's fair. Often the root cause analysis will lead to very careful engineering to ensure that outage doesn't happen again. But is that engineering more valuable than the "hack" that got us out the woods? I don't think so. The improvisation that got our software operational again is what the customer values most for sure.

And maybe that reveals another crucial component of improvistion: it only happens in real time i.e. when we're being watched. To return to the example in the quote above, I think it's less the case that improvisation was rare at NASA, and more that they just wanted to have already "improvised" solutions for all combinations of problems _before_ the world was watching.

So is there no place for improvisation in software engineering? Sure, if no one actually uses the software. As soon as that software has an audience, improvisation is an important skill for those who build and maintain that software because at some point something's going to break and downtime is not an option - the band's got to keep on comping.  
